 Halfway through the journey we are living
 I found myself deep in a darkened forest,
May God so grant you, reader, to find fruit
In your reading: now ponder for yourself
 For I had lost all trace of the straight path.
 Ah how hard it is to tell what it was like,
 How wild the forest was, how dense and rugged!
 To think of it still fills my mind with panic.
 So bitter it is that death is hardly worse!
 But to describe the good discovered there
 I here will tell the other things I saw.
 I cannot say clearly how I entered there,
 So drowsy with sleep had I grown at that hour
 When first I wandered off from the true way.
 But when I had reached the base of a hill,
 There at the border where the valley ended
 That had cut my heart to the quick with panic,
 I looked up at the hill and saw its shoulder
 Mantled already with the planet's light
 That leads all people straight by every road.
 With that my panic quieted a little
 After lingering on in the lake of my heart
 Through the night I had so grievously passed.
 And like a person who with panting breath
 Struggles ashore out of the wide ocean
 Only to glance back at the treacherous surf,
 Just so my mind, racing on ahead,
 Turned back to marvel at the pass no one
 Ever before had issued from alive.
 After resting awhile my worn-out body,
 I pressed on up the wasted slope so that
 I always had one firm foot on the ground.
 But look! right near the upgrade of the climb
 Loomed a fleet and nimble-footed leopard
 With coat completely covered by dark spots!
 He did not flinch or back off from my gaze,
 But blocking the path that lay before me,
 Time and again he forced me to turn around.
 The hour was the beginning of the morning,
 And the sun was rising with those stars
 That first attended it when divine Love
 Set these lovely creations round in motion,
 So that the early hour and the pleasant season
 Gave me good reason to keep up my hopes
 Of that fierce beast there with his gaudy pelt.
 But not so when — to add now to my fears —
 In front of me I caught sight of a lion!
 He appeared to be coming straight at me
 With head held high and furious for hunger,
 So that the air itself seemed to be shaking.
 And then a wolf stalked, ravenously lean,
 Seemingly laden with such endless cravings
 That she had made many live in misery!
 She caused my spirits to sink down so low,
 From the dread I felt in seeing her there,
 I lost all hope of climbing to the summit.
 And just as a man, anxious for big winnings,
 But the time comes instead for him to lose,
 Cries and grieves the more he thinks about it,
 So did the restless she-beast make me feel
 When, edging closer toward me, step by step,
 She drove me back to where the sun is silent.
 While I was falling back to lower ground,
 Before my eyes now came a figure forward
 Of one grown feeble from long being mute.
 When I saw him in that deserted spot,
 "Pity me!" I shouted out to him,
 "Whoever you are, a shade or living man."
 "Not a man," he answered. "Once a man,
 Of parents who had come from Lombardy;
 Both of them were Mantuans by birth.
 "I was born late in Julius's reign
 And dwelt at Rome under the good Augustus
 In the period of false and lying gods.
 "A poet I was, and I sang of the just
 Son of Anchises who embarked from Troy
 After proud Ilium was burned to ashes.
 "But why do you turn back to so much grief?
 Why not bound up the delightful mountain
 Which is the source and font of every joy?"
 "Are you then Virgil and that wellspring
 That pours forth so lush a stream of speech?"
 Shamefacedly I responded to him.
 "O glory and light of all other poets,
 May the long study and the profound love
 That made me search your work come to my aid!
 "You are my mentor and my chosen author:
 Alone you are the one from whom I have taken
 The beautiful style that has brought me honor.
 "Look at the beast that drove me to turn back!
 Rescue me from her, celebrated sage,
 For she causes my veins and pulse to tremble."
 "You are destined to take another route,"
 He answered, seeing me reduced to tears,
 "If you want to be clear of this wilderness,
 "Because this beast that forces you to cry out
 Will not let anyone pass by her way
 But harries him until she finally kills him.
 "By nature she is so depraved and vicious
 That her greedy appetite is never filled:
 The more she feeds, the hungrier she grows.
 "Many the animal she has mated with,
 And will with more to come, until the Greyhound
 That shall painfully slaughter her arrives.